# Tutorial 3: Danmokou Chimera

This tutorial will work through implementing Danmaku Chimera in DMK using the tools in the first two tutorials. 

First, let's talk about **macros**. Macros are a powerful tool for duplicating code in scripts. We will discuss them at length in the macro tutorial, but for now, familiarize yourself with this format:

```python
!!{ variable value value value
```

This code tells the preprocessor to associate "variable" with the string "value value value". When the user invokes the macro by writing `$variable`, the preprocessor will replace it with the corresponding string.

These one-line macros are useful for defining constants that need to be used by multiple sources of information. We will use them often in this tutorial. 

Let's start with this code. You can create a new text file, dump this code in it, and then drag it to the "Behavior Script" property of the boss object you are using for testing in the inspector.

```python
<#> warnprefix
pattern({ })
phase(0)
	action(block, 0)
		shift-phase-to(1)
		
<!> type(spell, `Danmokou Chimera`)
<!> hp(14000)
<!> root(0, 0.5)
phase(40)
	action(block, 0)
		move(_, nroffset(px(sine(8p, 2, t))))
```

See the lines that start with `<!>` above the phase section? These are phase properties (<xref:SM.PhaseProperty> or StateMachines/SMProperties.cs), and are generally used to provide metadata to the boss about the spellcard. They will be discussed more in a later tutorial, but I want to bring your attention to the `root(x, y)` property. This property tells the boss what position it should be at before starting the card, and the boss will take 2 seconds to move to this position before actually starting the card. In effect, you never need to write movement code for the boss to move to the starting point of a spellcard.

Furthermore, when you're testing, you can set the value `TeleportAtPhaseStart` in Services/SaveData.cs to true. This will make the boss instantly move to the starting position every time you restart the script, which should save you a small amount of time.

Go ahead and check the value in SaveData.cs. (**Note: If you change C# code, you will need to recompile and restart the game. If you change BDSM script code, you can press R to reload instantly.**)

The move function here should be fairly familiar. We have made two minor modifications: now we are moving for an infinite length of time (`t = _`), and we are using the `px` function. `px(X) = pxy(X, 0)`-- there are many simplified functions in DMK to help you avoid writing zeros and redundant code.

Now let's fire some long arrow bullets. In DMK, these are called `keine` bullets, because I made it after practicing Keine's final spell for a bit too long.

Drop this under the movement code. 

```python
		gtrepeat {
			wait(2s)
			times(_)
			rv2incr(<22h>)
			wait-child
		} saction(0)
!!{ crpt 16
			sync keine-purple/w <1;:> gsrepeat {
				times($crpt)
				circle
				sfx(x-fire-tech-8)
				start {
					rootloc =v2 loc
				}
				expose { 
					v2 rootloc
				}
			} s(rvelocity(px(2)))
```

Go ahead and run it. You'll see that the boss moves around while also firing bullets. (Note: `h` is the numerical suffix for the multiplier `1/phi`. See [the parsing reference](parsing.md) for details.)

Some readers may be wondering why this firing code executes at all if it comes after a `move` function that runs for infinite time. The answer is that the `action` state machine runs all its children in *parallel*, ie. at the same time. On the other hand, the `saction` state machine runs its children sequentially.

The firing code makes use of the macro `crpt`, which we will use to mark the number of keine bullets in a circle. It also introduces a new modifier: `start`. `start`, `preloop`, `postloop`, and `end` are all modifiers that perform mathematical operations over bound variables. `start` occurs when the repeater starts, `preloop` occurs before every repeater iteration, `postloop` occurs after every repeater iteration, and `end` occurs when the repeater is about to return. All of them take an array of `GCRule` as an argument. `GCRule` is basically an assignment equation for bound data, in the following format:

`VARIABLE OPERATOR TYPE VALUE` 

In this case, we want to save the location of the firing entity (`loc`), which is a vector2, into the bound variable `rootloc`. 

We will also need to use this variable later on, so we also `expose` it as in the previous tutorial. This time, since `rootloc` is a vector2, we use `v2 rootloc`. 

Now, let's add some code to transform the keine bullets into circle bullets. Let's say that we want the keine bullets to fire for 1 second and then stay transformed for 3 seconds. We'll make macros `linet` and `circt` to mark these values.

Add this under your existing code:

```python
!!{ linet 1
!!{ circt 3
			wait($linet)
			bullet-control(once, keine-purple/w, cull _)
			bullet-control once keine-purple/w sm _
				sync gcircle-blue/w <> s(null)
```

Now, you should see the keine bullets fire, and after 1 second, they will get culled and summon a single unmoving circle in their place.

You may be wondering why the SM control even works if we put the cull control first. How can you run a control on a deleted object? The answer is that there is an enforced internal ordering for bullet controls, and cull is the last. When an SM and Cull control are both present, the SM control will run first.

Now, let's summon multiple circle bullets along the length of the keine bullet. Replace the SM control with this:

```python
			bullet-control once keine-purple/w sm _
				sync gcircle-blue/w <> gsrepeat {
					times(13)
					sfx(x-fire-tech-6)
					root(&rootloc)
					start {
						r =f dist(loc, &rootloc)
					}
					bindItr(bulletn)
					expose { 
						v2 rootloc
					}
				} s polar(
					&r - 0.2 * &bulletn,
					0)
```

If you run this, you'll see that the keine bullets summons bullets along the length of its body. The way this works is:

- We determine the distance from the original firing location to the keine bullet and store that as `r`. 
- Since the angle of the firing V2RV2 is inherited between fires, the position of the head of the keine bullet is now `polar(&r, 0)` relative to the original firing location. We can go backwards along its body by doing `polar(& - r 0.1, 0)`, etc.
- To fire the bullet from the original firing location, we provide a `root` modifier, which tells the repeater what origin to orient the final bullet against. By default, the root is the location of the boss at the time of firing, and this modifier overrides it with a fixed value.

Now, let's rotate the bullets. We'll add some colorization to make the structure more explicit:

```python
			bullet-control once keine-purple/w sm _
				sync gcircle-*/w <> gsrepeat {
					times(13)
					sfx(x-fire-tech-6)
					root(&rootloc)
					start	 {
						r =f dist(loc, &rootloc)
					}
					bindItr(bulletn)
					expose { 
						v2 rootloc
					}
					color({ blue purple })
					bindLR
				} s polar(
					&r - 0.2 * &bulletn,
					lerpsmooth(io-sine, 0, $circt, t,  0, (&lr * 1.5 * 360 / $crpt)))
```

You've already seen the `color` modifier, but this is the first time we're using the `bindLR` modifier. This modifier binds the variables `&lr` and `&rl`. `&lr` is 1 when the loop iteration is even and -1 when the loop iteration is odd, and `&rl` is the reverse. This will allow us to easily make alternating bullets rotate in opposite directions.

The next complexity is the `lerpsmooth` in the polar angle.

First, we decide how many degrees we want to rotate through. Here, we start at 0º and end at ±1.5*(360/crpt)º, where the even (blue) bullets rotate counterclockwise and the odd (purple) bullets rotate clockwise. The reason we need to make this relative to 360/crpt is so that the bullets line up when they end their rotation. You can try setting this to a random number like 50, and observe how the bullets don't line up when they finish rotating.

 We use `lerpsmooth` because we want the bullets to start off slowly and end slowly. The easing function for starting and ending slowly is `io-sine` (there are also `in-sine` and `out-sine`). And we want this to occur while the bullet's time is between `0` and `$circt` seconds.

Next, add the following lines to the end. Also, go back to the GTRepeat and set the wait time to `0s`. 

```python
			wait($circt)
			bullet-control(once, gcircle-*, cull _)
```

With this, we're almost done. We just need to write a bullet control to transform the circle bullets back into keine bullets. Let's go ahead and add the control:

```python
			bullet-control once gcircle-* sm (= &.bulletn 0)
				sync keine-purple/w <> gsrepeat {
					expose {
						v2 rootloc
					}
				} s rvelocity(cx(2))
```

We only want to resummon the keine bullets from the first bullet in each set, so we add a predicate that only passes if `bulletn` is zero. (Note: this means that if the player runs into the first bullet in a set, the keine bullet will not resummon. If you require that it always resummon, you would need to use empty bullets, which will be discussed in a later tutorial.)

If you run this code, you'll see that the angle of the resummoned bullets is completely wrong. This is because we rotated the circle bullets, so if we fire keine bullets along the circle bullets' firing angle, it won't take into effect the rotation we applied. There are a number of ways to solve this, but there's a simple trick that will suffice here. Since the bullets are rotating in a circle with constant radius, and we want to fire them outwards, we can just fire them perpendicular to the movement delta. Let's introduce the `face` modifier:

```python
				sync keine-purple/w <> gsrepeat {
					face(velocity)
					expose {
						v2 rootloc
					}
				} s rvelocity(cx(2))
```

Run this and you'll see that the resummoned keine bullets fire on the tangent to the circle of rotation. The `face` modifier applies a global rotation to the entire V2RV2 and firing direction of any bullet. By default, it is set to `original`, which applies the same rotation a bullet has to any children it summons. See <xref:Danmaku.Enums.Facing>. The other two important options are `derot` (Derotated) and `velocity`. Go ahead and try setting the face variable to `derot`.

Now that we have the resummoned bullets firing along the tangent, all we need to do is add an angle offset of ±90º to make them summon outwards:  

```python
				sync keine-purple/w <-90> gsrepeat {
					face(velocity)
					expose {
						v2 rootloc
					}
				} s rvelocity(cx(2))
```

With this, Danmokou Chimera is mechanically complete. However, you may be worried about the resummoned bullets. By default, DMK has handling for making bullets scale in when they are summoned, since large bullets appearing instantly looks very strange. As a result, the resummoned bullets are slowly scaling in when they are resummoned, and this makes the spellcard visually unclear.

The easy solution for this is simply to add a time offset.

```python
				sync keine-purple/w <-90> addtime 1s gsrepeat {
					face(velocity)
					expose {
						v2 rootloc
					}
				} s rvelocity if((> t 1), cx 2, zero)
```

By offsetting the time of the resummoned keine bullets by 1 second, they no longer scale in. 

Note that we also have to change the velocity function to be zero when time is less than one. This is because `addtime` will actually simulate the skipped time when creating the bullet. The engine actually handles this the same way it does half-frame fires-- you can fire something every 0.5 frames and the result will be smooth. As a result, we need to make sure the keine bullet has zero velocity when its time is less than the time offset. You can try setting the velocity to just `cx(2)` and seeing what happens.

That's all for this tutorial! 

Final code:

```python
pattern({ })
phase(0)
	action(block, 0)
		shift-phase-to(1)
		
<!> type(spell, `Danmokou Chimera`)
<!> hp(14000)
<!> root 0 0.5
phase(40)
	action(block, 0)
		move(_, nroffset(px(sine(8p, 2, t))))
		gtrepeat {
			wait(0s)
			times(_)
			rv2incr(<22h>)
			wait-child
		} saction(0)
!!{ crpt 16
			sync keine-purple/w <1;:> gsrepeat {
				times($crpt)
				circle
				sfx(x-fire-tech-8)
				start {
					rootloc =v2 loc
				}
				expose { 
					v2 rootloc
				}
			} s(rvelocity(px(2)))
!!{ linet 1
!!{ circt 3
			wait($linet)
			bullet-control(once, keine-purple/w, cull _)
			bullet-control once keine-purple/w sm _
				sync gcircle-*/w <> gsrepeat {
					times(13)
					sfx(x-fire-tech-6)
					root(&rootloc)
					start	 {
						r =f dist(loc, &rootloc)
					}
					bindItr(bulletn)
					expose { 
						v2 rootloc
					}
					color({ blue purple })
					bindLR
				} s polar(
					&r - 0.2 * &bulletn,
					lerpsmooth(io-sine, 0, $circt, t,  0, (&lr * 1.5 * 360 / $crpt)))
			wait($circt)
			bullet-control(once, gcircle-*, cull _)
			bullet-control once gcircle-* sm (= &.bulletn 0)
				sync keine-purple/w <-90> addtime 1s gsrepeat {
					face(velocity)
					expose {
						v2 rootloc
					}
				} s rvelocity if((> t 1), cx 2, zero)
```

